---
title: The Front End of SXA
tags:
- Sitecore
- SxA
- Front End Development
category: SxA
---
The struggle is real. Front end vs Back end development can often cause issues as both teams have desired ways of working and favorite tools etc... it can be tricky for both teams to collaborate well without causing friction. Especially when you bring things into play like SXA where there is a perception that as a front end developer you completely lose control over the markup and codebase.

But mostly that *is* a perception that is founded on misconceptions of what SXA does with markup and how front end teams need to work with SXA & Creative Exchange.

## How SXA Handles HTML

It is true, the HTML in SXA is generated by the platform, and as a front end developer there are certain conventions that need to be followed. SXA makes heavy use of **Rendering Variants**, for those that don't know, a Rendering Variant, is a way of building a component where the HTML is stored in Sitecore as items rather than the traditional way of writing the HTML text in a razor view.

// TODO: Add Rendering Variant Definition screenshot

This Rendering Variant Definition is then used to generate the HTML used to render out the component. Rendering Variants are very powerful, they allow us to really separate the content from the presentation. As a marketer, I can create once peice of content and then display that content with multiple different views through the use of Rendering Variants. IMO, Rendering Variants are one of the most powerful parts of SXA. They also reduce the time for a backend team to develop a component by a massive amount. Instead of having to scaffold a razor view, model, repository and/or controller classes, I can just clone an existing component, modify the data template for the fields I want and then create the required HTML in a rendering variant. I don't need to open up Visual Studio at all... *and* I don't need to **deploy** any code! No waiting for Sitecore to startup to test anything!

## Why Rendering Variants don't Restrict FED